RECORD: #24
PMID: 34076068
PMCID: PMC8827368
TITLE: Low-dose ketamine does not improve the speed of recovery from depression in electroconvulsive therapy: a randomized controlled trial
AUTHORS AND AFFILIATIONS:
- Adrianna J. Woolsey - Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
- Jalal A. Nanji - Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
- Chantal Moreau - Department of Psychiatry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
- Sudhakar Sivapalan - Department of Psychiatry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
- Stephane L. Bourque - Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
- Alfonso Ceccherini-Nelli - Department of Psychiatry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
- Ferrante S. Gragasin - Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02579642
FUNDING: Division of Addiction and Mental Health, Edmonton Zone, Alberta Health Services

METHODS:
Study overview: This trial was conducted at the University of Alberta Hospital in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Study design: This was a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial in adult patients with major depressive disorder undergoing ECT. The study was designed with an interim analysis to allow for reassessment of the intervention in an effort to enhance safety and increase the likelihood of detecting any differences. The initial 14 subjects would receive ketamine at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg, which was chosen as the lowest feasible starting dose based on a literature review. An interim analysis of psychiatric endpoints would then be performed; if a trend towards a difference was detected, the study would go on to recruit an additional 14 patients, using a dose of 0.2 mg/kg. However, if no difference was detected, the dose would be increased to 0.5 mg/kg (again, based on studies which found that this dose had a beneficial effect on depression while remaining within the range of a sub-anesthetic dose), and an additional 30 patients would be recruited.

Subjects: The inclusion criteria were adults between 18 and 70 years of age referred for ECT with a DSM-5 diagnosis of major depressive disorder and at least moderate to severe depression as measured by a baseline Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) score > 24. The included patients were having a "first" or "new" episode of depression that had lasted not more than 3 months and who, according to a psychiatrist, required ECT treatment. The exclusion criteria were: 1) patients considered American Society of Anesthesiologists Class IV or V; patients who received any ECT treatments in the 3 months prior to enrollment; 2) a history of allergic reactions, hypersensitivity, or intolerance to anesthetics or their constituents used in the study; 3) any of the following DSM-5 diagnoses at the time of enrollment: substance or alcohol dependence (except for dependence in full remission and caffeine or nicotine dependence), abuse of opiates, amphetamines, barbiturates, cocaine, cannabis, or hallucinogens in the 4 weeks prior to enrollment, a pervasive developmental disorder or dementia; 4) a significant medical condition or concurrent medication that would contraindicate the use of ketamine or propofol or a medical condition that is untreated and requires urgent attention; 5) an unstable or inadequately treated medical illness; 6) an increased risk of laryngospasm (such as active pulmonary infection, upper respiratory infection, asthma); 7) any clinically significant deviation from the reference range in clinical laboratory test results; 8) pregnancy (or female of child-bearing age not using adequate contraception) or lactation; 9) participation in another drug trial in the 4 weeks prior to enrollment in this study; and 10) inability or refusal to provide informed consent.

Randomization and blinding: Allocation concealment was achieved using the sequentially-numbered, opaque, sealed envelope method. The study coordinator was responsible for creating the sealed envelopes, which were then delivered to the research pharmacy for shuffling and assignment. As a result, the study coordinator, treating psychiatrist, anesthesiologist, and patients were all blinded to treatment allocation. The study statistician was also blinded to treatment allocation when performing the analysis.

Study medication: The study drug was prepared by the research pharmacy in a syringe labelled with patient identifiers, containing either ketamine (Sandoz Canada, Boucherville, QC, Canada) 0.2 mg/kg (patients 1-14) or 0.5 mg/kg (patients 15 onward) or an equivalent volume of normal saline. The syringes were then securely delivered to the ECT treatment area and immediately given to the ECT anesthesiologist. The anesthesiologist was instructed to administer the entire study drug syringe followed immediately by propofol (Aspen Pharmacare Canada Inc., Oakville, ON, Canada) and succinylcholine (Teligent Canada Inc., Mississauga, ON, Canada). The dosing of all agents and adjuncts was determined at the discretion of the attending anesthesiologist to achieve adequate anesthesia for the ECT treatment.

Procedures: The patients received the study drug at each of their treatments in the index course of ECT. A maximum of 12 treatments were performed, or until the patient was transitioned to maintenance ECT therapy, whichever came first. Per protocol at the institution, patients receive ECT three times per week, on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday; therefore, a typical 12-treatment index course would span approximately four weeks. Pulse ECT was performed using a MECTA SpECTrum 5000Q device (MECTA Corp, Tualatin, OR, USA) with titrated stimulus dosing per titration protocols for unilateral ultrabrief and bilateral pulses. A REDCap secure online database was provided by the University of Alberta and used for data collection and management.

Outcomes: The primary outcome measure was the number of ECT sessions required to achieve a 50% reduction in the 10-item MADRS. The secondary psychiatric outcome measures were the number of ECT sessions needed to achieve a 25% reduction in the MADRS and any improvement in the 7-point Clinical Global Impression Scale for Severity (CGI-S). These scales were administered by the treating psychiatrist before the first ECT session and before every subsequent session. Data were collected on the following non-psychiatric secondary outcomes: heart rate, blood pressure, oxygen saturation, respiratory rate, temperature, and seizure duration, which was observed both visually and by EEG. The dosing of propofol, succinylcholine, and adjunctive medications were recorded. Adverse events were collected by spontaneous report at every ECT session and during inpatient hospitalization.

Statistical analysis: Sample size calculations were based on studies examining the use of ketamine infusion for treatment-resistant major depressive disorder. Based on an estimate that response (defined as a reduction in MADRS of greater than 50%) after a single ECT treatment is rare and does not occur in more than 10% of patients, an a priori power analysis indicated that 14 subjects per group would be required for a power of 80%, assuming an alpha level of 0.05. All analyses were completed on an intention-to-treat basis. The interim analysis was performed on primary and secondary psychiatric endpoints only; specifically, MADRS and CGI-S scores were examined using an independent samples t-test and Levene's test. The final analyses were performed with psychiatric data (MADRS and CGI-S outcomes) and analyzed via an independent samples t-test and Levene's test. Non-psychiatric outcomes, including hemodynamic and seizure data, were analyzed using an independent samples t-test. The data are presented as mean +/- standard deviation (SD). A p-value of < 0.05 was considered significant.

Ethics statement: This study was approved by the health research ethics boards of the University of Alberta (study ID Pro00044771). Health Canada approval was obtained for the off-label use of ketamine. Informed verbal and written consent were obtained from all patients prior to study participation.

RESULTS:
Screening and randomization: A total of 48 patients provided informed consent for study enrollment between October 2015 and May 2019. One patient was excluded after enrollment and two patients withdrew from ECT entirely. A total of 45 patients completed the study and were included in the final analyses. Enrollment was discontinued when the predetermined sample size was achieved.

The first 14 patients were randomized to receive either ketamine at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg or an equivalent volume of saline, with 7 receiving treatment (ketamine) and 7 receiving placebo (saline). Interim analysis revealed no difference between the groups; therefore, the subsequent 31 patients were randomized to receive ketamine at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg or placebo, with 16 patients ultimately receiving ketamine and 15 patients receiving placebo. The majority of patients were women (73%). The mean age was 42.9, and the mean baseline MADRS score was 37.1.

Psychiatric endpoints: At interim analysis, no significant differences in primary or secondary psychiatric outcomes were noted. In the pre-interim analysis groups, the final MADRS scores were 11.17+/-9.04 and 10.71+/-7.93 for the ketamine and placebo groups, respectively; and the CGI-S scores at the conclusion of ECT treatment sessions were 2.67+/-1.21 and 3.14+/-1.35 for the ketamine and placebo groups, respectively. In the final analyses (post-interim analysis groups), there were no significant differences in the primary or secondary outcomes, with the ketamine group achieving a 50% reduction in MADRS after 8.25+/-2.72 ECT sessions, while the placebo group required an average of 7.73+/-2.89 ECT sessions (p = 0.61). There was no difference in the number of ECT sessions required to achieve a 25% reduction in MADRS or in the CGI-S score between groups. The ketamine group achieved a 25% MADRS reduction in 4.25+/-1.52 ECT sessions and the placebo group achieved it in 5.47+/-2.95 ECT sessions (p = 0.34). The CGI-S score improved in the ketamine group by 3.75+/-2.30 and by 4.73+/-2.98 in the placebo group (p = 0.26). The final MADRS scores at the conclusion of the ECT sessions were 13.11+/-4.83 for the ketamine group and 10.83+/-6.86 for the placebo group. The final CGI-S scores at the conclusion of ECT sessions were 1.67+/-1.23 for the ketamine group and 1.58+/-1.17 for the placebo group.

Non-psychiatric endpoints: The maximum heart rate was significantly higher in the ketamine group than the placebo group (98.64+/-8.06 vs. 90.32+/-12.77 bpm; p = 0.037). The mean arterial pressure (MAP) did not differ significantly between the ketamine and placebo groups (112.64+/-11.75 vs. 110.70+/-7.98 mmHg; p = 0.60). However, when the maximum heart rate and MAP were normalized to the patient's baseline pre-ECT values, they did not differ significantly between the groups. Propofol dosing was examined for both the interim (ketamine 0.2 mg/kg) and final (ketamine 0.5 mg/kg) analyses. No difference in total dose was found in the interim analysis. In the final analysis, a trend towards a lower dose of propofol was observed in the ketamine group (1.10+/-0.31 mg/kg vs. 1.36+/-0.39 mg/kg; p = 0.053). Seizure duration did not significantly differ between groups. No unexpected adverse events were reported.

EDIA/EQUITY REPORTING:
Sex/Gender: The majority of patients were women (73%). Baseline demographics tables show the distribution of male and female participants.
Age: Mean age of participants 42.9 years overall. Pre-interim analysis mean ages were 46.1+/-18.8 (ketamine) and 49.0+/-18.7 (placebo). Post-interim analysis mean ages were 36.9+/-15.0 (ketamine) and 45.0+/-11.5 (placebo). Inclusion criteria specified adults between 18 and 70 years of age.
Race/Ethnicity: NOT REPORTED. No explicit reporting of race, ethnicity, or other racialized categories.
SES/Education: NOT REPORTED.
Other PROGRESS-Plus: NOT REPORTED. No reporting on Indigenous status, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability status, rural/urban, immigration status, language, or religion.

CANADIAN INVOLVEMENT:
Canadian Site: University of Alberta Hospital in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada (sole study site - entirely Canadian trial)
Canadian Authors: All seven authors are affiliated with the University of Alberta (Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, or Department of Psychiatry)
Canadian Funding: Division of Addiction and Mental Health, Edmonton Zone, Alberta Health Services
Canadian Regulatory: Health Canada approval was obtained for the off-label use of ketamine
Canadian Ethics: Approved by the health research ethics boards of the University of Alberta (study ID Pro00044771)
